designDocsBackup/core/relationship-system.md, before:

# Relationship System in TinySim

Understanding relationships between entities is fundamental to creating believable simulations. In TinySim, relationships aren't just simple references between entities - they're rich, dynamic structures that capture the complex ways entities can interact and influence each other.

## The Philosophy of Relationships

Traditional game engines often treat relationships as simple parent-child hierarchies or basic references. While this works for simple scenarios like attaching a weapon to a character's hand, it falls short when modeling the rich tapestry of relationships we see in real-world scenarios.

Think about how humans form and maintain relationships. A friendship isn't just a binary state - it has a history, an emotional context, shared experiences, and varying levels of trust and intimacy. A tool isn't just "owned" by an agent - the agent has learned how to use it, has memories associated with it, and might even have emotional attachments to it.

TinySim's relationship system captures these nuances by treating relationships themselves as first-class entities in our ECS architecture. This means relationships can have their own components, can be processed by systems, and can evolve over time just like any other aspect of our simulation.

## Relationship as Components

When we model relationships as components, we gain tremendous flexibility. Consider a simple social relationship:

    import { defineComponent } from 'bitecs'

    export const SocialBond = defineComponent({
        strength: [] as number[],         // How strong is the relationship
        trust: [] as number[],            // Level of trust between entities
        familiarity: [] as number[],      // How well they know each other
        sharedExperiences: [] as number[] // Count of significant shared experiences
    })

This approach might seem strange at first - why not just store these values in the agent entities themselves? The power becomes apparent when you consider how this enables relationship processing:

1. We can easily query for all relationships of a certain type
2. Relationship data is stored contiguously for efficient processing
3. Relationships can have their own lifecycle independent of the entities they connect
4. We can model complex relationship networks without modifying the entities involved

## Dynamic Relationship Evolution

Real relationships aren't static - they evolve based on interactions and experiences. Our relationship system models this through specialized systems that process relationship components. Here's how a social relationship might evolve:

    export const SocialBondSystem = defineSystem((world) => {
        const relationships = query(world, [SocialBond, InteractionHistory])

        for (const rid of relationships) {
            // Recent interactions affect relationship strength
            const recentInteractions = getRecentInteractions(world, rid)
            for (const interaction of recentInteractions) {
                updateRelationshipStrength(world, rid, interaction)
            }

            // Trust evolves based on interaction outcomes
            updateTrust(world, rid)

            // Familiarity grows with time spent together
            updateFamiliarity(world, rid)

            // Decay relationships that aren't maintained
            applyRelationshipDecay(world, rid)
        }

        return world
    })

This system demonstrates how relationships can grow stronger or weaker over time, how trust can be built or broken, and how familiarity develops through continued interaction. It's not just updating numbers - it's modeling the complex dynamics of real relationships.

## Relationship Networks

One of the most powerful aspects of our relationship system is its ability to model complex networks of relationships. Consider a social network in a small community:

Each agent might have relationships with multiple other agents, each relationship having its own characteristics. These relationships form a graph structure, but unlike traditional graph implementations, our ECS approach makes it efficient to:

1. Find all relationships of a particular type
2. Process relationship updates in bulk
3. Analyze network patterns and structures
4. Model how relationships influence each other

For example, if Agent A trusts Agent B, and Agent B trusts Agent C, this might influence how quickly Agent A develops trust in Agent C. This kind of relationship transitivity is easy to model in our system:

    export const RelationshipTransitivitySystem = defineSystem((world) => {
        const relationships = query(world, [SocialBond])

        // Build relationship graph for analysis
        const relationshipGraph = buildRelationshipGraph(world, relationships)

        // Analyze relationship paths
        for (const rid of relationships) {
            const indirectConnections = findIndirectConnections(relationshipGraph, rid)
            updateIndirectRelationships(world, rid, indirectConnections)
        }

        return world
    })

## Emotional Context

Relationships in TinySim aren't just logical connections - they have emotional weight. When an agent interacts with another agent or object they have a relationship with, their emotional state is influenced by that relationship:

    export const EmotionalContextSystem = defineSystem((world) => {
        const interactions = query(world, [Interaction, Participant])

        for (const iid of interactions) {
            const participants = getParticipants(world, iid)
            const relationship = findRelationship(world, participants)

            if (relationship) {
                // Relationship affects emotional response to interaction
                modifyEmotionalResponse(world, iid, relationship)

                // Interaction affects relationship
                updateRelationshipFromInteraction(world, relationship, iid)
            }
        }

        return world
    })

This emotional context makes relationships feel more real and influences how agents behave toward each other or interact with objects they have relationships with.

[Continue with more sections about relationship memory, relationship constraints, relationship types, etc...]

Commit message:

Switch tiny world to argOS

designDocsBackup/core/relationship-system.md, after:

# Relationship System in ArgOS

Understanding relationships between entities is fundamental to creating believable simulations. In ArgOS, relationships aren't just simple references between entities - they're rich, dynamic structures that capture the complex ways entities can interact and influence each other.

## The Philosophy of Relationships

Traditional game engines often treat relationships as simple parent-child hierarchies or basic references. While this works for simple scenarios like attaching a weapon to a character's hand, it falls short when modeling the rich tapestry of relationships we see in real-world scenarios.

Think about how humans form and maintain relationships. A friendship isn't just a binary state - it has a history, an emotional context, shared experiences, and varying levels of trust and intimacy. A tool isn't just "owned" by an agent - the agent has learned how to use it, has memories associated with it, and might even have emotional attachments to it.

ArgOS's relationship system captures these nuances by treating relationships themselves as first-class entities in our ECS architecture. This means relationships can have their own components, can be processed by systems, and can evolve over time just like any other aspect of our simulation.

## Relationship as Components

When we model relationships as components, we gain tremendous flexibility. Consider a simple social relationship:

    import { defineComponent } from 'bitecs'

    export const SocialBond = defineComponent({
        strength: [] as number[],         // How strong is the relationship
        trust: [] as number[],            // Level of trust between entities
        familiarity: [] as number[],      // How well they know each other
        sharedExperiences: [] as number[] // Count of significant shared experiences
    })

This approach might seem strange at first - why not just store these values in the agent entities themselves? The power becomes apparent when you consider how this enables relationship processing:

1. We can easily query for all relationships of a certain type
2. Relationship data is stored contiguously for efficient processing
3. Relationships can have their own lifecycle independent of the entities they connect
4. We can model complex relationship networks without modifying the entities involved

## Dynamic Relationship Evolution

Real relationships aren't static - they evolve based on interactions and experiences. Our relationship system models this through specialized systems that process relationship components. Here's how a social relationship might evolve:

    export const SocialBondSystem = defineSystem((world) => {
        const relationships = query(world, [SocialBond, InteractionHistory])

        for (const rid of relationships) {
            // Recent interactions affect relationship strength
            const recentInteractions = getRecentInteractions(world, rid)
            for (const interaction of recentInteractions) {
                updateRelationshipStrength(world, rid, interaction)
            }

            // Trust evolves based on interaction outcomes
            updateTrust(world, rid)

            // Familiarity grows with time spent together
            updateFamiliarity(world, rid)

            // Decay relationships that aren't maintained
            applyRelationshipDecay(world, rid)
        }

        return world
    })

This system demonstrates how relationships can grow stronger or weaker over time, how trust can be built or broken, and how familiarity develops through continued interaction. It's not just updating numbers - it's modeling the complex dynamics of real relationships.

## Relationship Networks

One of the most powerful aspects of our relationship system is its ability to model complex networks of relationships. Consider a social network in a small community:

Each agent might have relationships with multiple other agents, each relationship having its own characteristics. These relationships form a graph structure, but unlike traditional graph implementations, our ECS approach makes it efficient to:

1. Find all relationships of a particular type
2. Process relationship updates in bulk
3. Analyze network patterns and structures
4. Model how relationships influence each other

For example, if Agent A trusts Agent B, and Agent B trusts Agent C, this might influence how quickly Agent A develops trust in Agent C. This kind of relationship transitivity is easy to model in our system:

    export const RelationshipTransitivitySystem = defineSystem((world) => {
        const relationships = query(world, [SocialBond])

        // Build relationship graph for analysis
        const relationshipGraph = buildRelationshipGraph(world, relationships)

        // Analyze relationship paths
        for (const rid of relationships) {
            const indirectConnections = findIndirectConnections(relationshipGraph, rid)
            updateIndirectRelationships(world, rid, indirectConnections)
        }

        return world
    })

## Emotional Context

Relationships in ArgOS aren't just logical connections - they have emotional weight. When an agent interacts with another agent or object they have a relationship with, their emotional state is influenced by that relationship:

    export const EmotionalContextSystem = defineSystem((world) => {
        const interactions = query(world, [Interaction, Participant])

        for (const iid of interactions) {
            const participants = getParticipants(world, iid)
            const relationship = findRelationship(world, participants)

            if (relationship) {
                // Relationship affects emotional response to interaction
                modifyEmotionalResponse(world, iid, relationship)

                // Interaction affects relationship
                updateRelationshipFromInteraction(world, relationship, iid)
            }
        }

        return world
    })

This emotional context makes relationships feel more real and influences how agents behave toward each other or interact with objects they have relationships with.

[Continue with more sections about relationship memory, relationship constraints, relationship types, etc...]
