designDocsBackup/agents/emotional-system.md, before:

# Emotional Processing in TinySim

The emotional system in TinySim goes far beyond simple state tracking. Instead of treating emotions as mere tags or numerical values, we've created a sophisticated emotional processing system that models how emotions arise, interact, evolve, and influence behavior. This system is crucial for creating agents that feel genuinely alive and respond believably to their experiences.

## Understanding Emotions in TinySim

Real emotions aren't discrete states - they're complex, overlapping patterns of response that emerge from our experiences and influence our perception, decision-making, and behavior. TinySim's emotional system mirrors this complexity by modeling emotions as dynamic, interconnected processes rather than simple states.

When an agent experiences an event, their emotional response isn't just a direct mapping from stimulus to emotion. Instead, the emotional system considers:

- The agent's current emotional state
- Their personality traits and temperament
- Recent experiences and emotional history
- Relationships with involved entities
- Environmental context
- Current goals and needs
- Physical state (like fatigue or stress)

## Core Emotional Components

The emotional system is built on several sophisticated components that work together:

### EmotionalState Component

This component tracks the current emotional landscape of an agent:

    export const EmotionalState = defineComponent({
        // Base emotions (using dimensional model)
        valence: [] as number[],      // Positive vs negative feeling
        arousal: [] as number[],      // Level of activation/energy
        dominance: [] as number[],    // Sense of control/power

        // Emotional intensity and decay
        intensity: [] as number[],    // Current emotional intensity
        decayRate: [] as number[],    // How quickly emotions fade

        // Emotional capacity
        saturation: [] as number[],   // Current emotional load
        resilience: [] as number[],   // Ability to handle emotions

        // Emotional history
        recentHistory: [] as number[] // Recent emotional states
    })

### EmotionalTrait Component

This component defines an agent's emotional tendencies and capabilities:

    export const EmotionalTrait = defineComponent({
        // Personality influences
        sensitivity: [] as number[],  // How easily emotions are triggered
        volatility: [] as number[],   // How quickly emotions change
        expressiveness: [] as number[], // How openly emotions are shown

        // Emotional processing style
        regulationStyle: [] as number[], // How emotions are managed
        copingMechanisms: [] as number[], // Available coping strategies

        // Emotional learning
        adaptability: [] as number[], // Ability to adjust responses
        emotionalMemory: [] as number[] // Impact of past experiences
    })

## Emotional Processing Systems

The emotional system is managed by several interconnected systems that handle different aspects of emotional processing:

### EmotionalUpdateSystem

This system handles the core emotional processing loop:

    export const EmotionalUpdateSystem = defineSystem((world) => {
        const entities = query(world, [EmotionalState, EmotionalTrait])

        for (const eid of entities) {
            // Process environmental inputs
            processEmotionalStimuli(world, eid)

            // Update emotional state
            updateEmotionalDynamics(world, eid)

            // Apply emotional regulation
            regulateEmotions(world, eid)

            // Update emotional expression
            updateEmotionalExpression(world, eid)

            // Process emotional influence on cognition
            updateCognitiveInfluence(world, eid)
        }

        return world
    })

### EmotionalRegulationSystem

This sophisticated system models how agents manage and regulate their emotions:

    export const EmotionalRegulationSystem = defineSystem((world) => {
        const entities = query(world, [
            EmotionalState,
            EmotionalTrait,
            CognitiveCapability
        ])

        for (const eid of entities) {
            // Assess emotional state
            const assessment = assessEmotionalState(world, eid)

            // Choose regulation strategies
            const strategies = selectRegulationStrategies(world, eid, assessment)

            // Apply regulation
            for (const strategy of strategies) {
                applyRegulationStrategy(world, eid, strategy)
            }

            // Update regulation effectiveness
            updateRegulationLearning(world, eid)
        }

        return world
    })

## Emotional Influence on Behavior

The emotional system profoundly influences agent behavior through several mechanisms:

### Decision Making

Emotions affect how agents evaluate options and make choices:

    export const EmotionalDecisionSystem = defineSystem((world) => {
        const entities = query(world, [
            EmotionalState,
            DecisionMaking,
            GoalManagement
        ])

        for (const eid of entities) {
            // Get current emotional context
            const emotionalContext = getEmotionalContext(world, eid)

            // Modify decision weights based on emotions
            adjustDecisionWeights(world, eid, emotionalContext)

            // Update risk assessment
            updateRiskPerception(world, eid, emotionalContext)

            // Influence goal priorities
            modifyGoalPriorities(world, eid, emotionalContext)
        }

        return world
    })

[Continue with sections on Emotional Learning, Social Emotional Intelligence, etc...]

Commit message:

Switch tiny world to argOS

designDocsBackup/agents/emotional-system.md, after:

# Emotional Processing in ArgOS

The emotional system in ArgOS goes far beyond simple state tracking. Instead of treating emotions as mere tags or numerical values, we've created a sophisticated emotional processing system that models how emotions arise, interact, evolve, and influence behavior. This system is crucial for creating agents that feel genuinely alive and respond believably to their experiences.

## Understanding Emotions in ArgOS

Real emotions aren't discrete states - they're complex, overlapping patterns of response that emerge from our experiences and influence our perception, decision-making, and behavior. ArgOS's emotional system mirrors this complexity by modeling emotions as dynamic, interconnected processes rather than simple states.

When an agent experiences an event, their emotional response isn't just a direct mapping from stimulus to emotion. Instead, the emotional system considers:

- The agent's current emotional state
- Their personality traits and temperament
- Recent experiences and emotional history
- Relationships with involved entities
- Environmental context
- Current goals and needs
- Physical state (like fatigue or stress)

## Core Emotional Components

The emotional system is built on several sophisticated components that work together:

### EmotionalState Component

This component tracks the current emotional landscape of an agent:

    export const EmotionalState = defineComponent({
        // Base emotions (using dimensional model)
        valence: [] as number[],      // Positive vs negative feeling
        arousal: [] as number[],      // Level of activation/energy
        dominance: [] as number[],    // Sense of control/power

        // Emotional intensity and decay
        intensity: [] as number[],    // Current emotional intensity
        decayRate: [] as number[],    // How quickly emotions fade

        // Emotional capacity
        saturation: [] as number[],   // Current emotional load
        resilience: [] as number[],   // Ability to handle emotions

        // Emotional history
        recentHistory: [] as number[] // Recent emotional states
    })

### EmotionalTrait Component

This component defines an agent's emotional tendencies and capabilities:

    export const EmotionalTrait = defineComponent({
        // Personality influences
        sensitivity: [] as number[],  // How easily emotions are triggered
        volatility: [] as number[],   // How quickly emotions change
        expressiveness: [] as number[], // How openly emotions are shown

        // Emotional processing style
        regulationStyle: [] as number[], // How emotions are managed
        copingMechanisms: [] as number[], // Available coping strategies

        // Emotional learning
        adaptability: [] as number[], // Ability to adjust responses
        emotionalMemory: [] as number[] // Impact of past experiences
    })

## Emotional Processing Systems

The emotional system is managed by several interconnected systems that handle different aspects of emotional processing:

### EmotionalUpdateSystem

This system handles the core emotional processing loop:

    export const EmotionalUpdateSystem = defineSystem((world) => {
        const entities = query(world, [EmotionalState, EmotionalTrait])

        for (const eid of entities) {
            // Process environmental inputs
            processEmotionalStimuli(world, eid)

            // Update emotional state
            updateEmotionalDynamics(world, eid)

            // Apply emotional regulation
            regulateEmotions(world, eid)

            // Update emotional expression
            updateEmotionalExpression(world, eid)

            // Process emotional influence on cognition
            updateCognitiveInfluence(world, eid)
        }

        return world
    })

### EmotionalRegulationSystem

This sophisticated system models how agents manage and regulate their emotions:

    export const EmotionalRegulationSystem = defineSystem((world) => {
        const entities = query(world, [
            EmotionalState,
            EmotionalTrait,
            CognitiveCapability
        ])

        for (const eid of entities) {
            // Assess emotional state
            const assessment = assessEmotionalState(world, eid)

            // Choose regulation strategies
            const strategies = selectRegulationStrategies(world, eid, assessment)

            // Apply regulation
            for (const strategy of strategies) {
                applyRegulationStrategy(world, eid, strategy)
            }

            // Update regulation effectiveness
            updateRegulationLearning(world, eid)
        }

        return world
    })

## Emotional Influence on Behavior

The emotional system profoundly influences agent behavior through several mechanisms:

### Decision Making

Emotions affect how agents evaluate options and make choices:

    export const EmotionalDecisionSystem = defineSystem((world) => {
        const entities = query(world, [
            EmotionalState,
            DecisionMaking,
            GoalManagement
        ])

        for (const eid of entities) {
            // Get current emotional context
            const emotionalContext = getEmotionalContext(world, eid)

            // Modify decision weights based on emotions
            adjustDecisionWeights(world, eid, emotionalContext)

            // Update risk assessment
            updateRiskPerception(world, eid, emotionalContext)

            // Influence goal priorities
            modifyGoalPriorities(world, eid, emotionalContext)
        }

        return world
    })

[Continue with sections on Emotional Learning, Social Emotional Intelligence, etc...]
