designDocsBackup/agents/goal-system.md, before:

# Goal System in TinySim

The Goal System represents how agents form, prioritize, and pursue objectives. Unlike simple task systems where agents work through predefined lists, TinySim's goal system creates dynamic, emergent behavior through a sophisticated interplay of desires, opportunities, and constraints.

## Understanding Goals in TinySim

In real life, goals aren't just items on a to-do list. They're complex, interconnected desires that compete for attention and resources. A person might simultaneously want to advance their career, maintain relationships, learn new skills, and take care of their health. These goals interact, sometimes supporting each other and sometimes conflicting.

TinySim models this complexity by treating goals as dynamic, evolving structures that exist within a rich context of other goals, emotional states, and environmental conditions. When an agent considers what to do next, they don't just pick the "top" goal - they weigh multiple factors including:

- The relative importance of different goals
- Current opportunities and constraints
- Emotional state and energy levels
- Past experiences and learned patterns
- Social context and relationships
- Available tools and resources
- Time constraints and urgency

## Core Goal Components

The goal system is built on several sophisticated components:

### GoalState Component

This component manages an agent's current goals and their states:

    export const GoalState = defineComponent({
        // Active goals
        activeGoals: [] as number[],      // Currently pursued goals
        goalPriorities: [] as number[],   // Relative importance of goals
        goalProgress: [] as number[],     // Progress toward each goal

        // Goal relationships
        dependencies: [] as number[],      // Goals that must be completed first
        conflicts: [] as number[],         // Goals that interfere with each other
        synergies: [] as number[],         // Goals that help each other

        // Goal context
        resources: [] as number[],         // Resources allocated to goals
        deadlines: [] as number[],         // Time constraints for goals
        flexibility: [] as number[]        // How adaptable each goal is
    })

### GoalCapability Component

This defines an agent's ability to manage and pursue goals:

    export const GoalCapability = defineComponent({
        // Goal management abilities
        planningDepth: [] as number[],     // How far ahead agent can plan
        multitasking: [] as number[],      // Ability to pursue multiple goals
        persistence: [] as number[],       // Ability to maintain long-term goals

        // Goal adaptation
        flexibility: [] as number[],       // Ability to adjust goals
        creativity: [] as number[],        // Ability to find new approaches
        resilience: [] as number[]         // Recovery from setbacks
    })

## Goal Processing Systems

The goal system operates through several interconnected systems:

### GoalGenerationSystem

This system handles the creation and updating of goals:

    export const GoalGenerationSystem = defineSystem((world) => {
        const agents = query(world, [
            GoalState,
            GoalCapability,
            NeedState
        ])

        for (const eid of agents) {
            // Assess current needs
            const needs = assessNeeds(world, eid)

            // Generate goals from needs
            const newGoals = generateGoalsFromNeeds(world, eid, needs)

            // Consider opportunities
            const opportunities = identifyOpportunities(world, eid)
            const opportunisticGoals = generateOpportunisticGoals(
                world,
                eid,
                opportunities
            )

            // Integrate new goals
            integrateNewGoals(world, eid, [...newGoals, ...opportunisticGoals])

            // Update goal relationships
            updateGoalRelationships(world, eid)
        }

        return world
    })

### GoalPrioritizationSystem

This sophisticated system manages how goals compete for attention and resources:

    export const GoalPrioritizationSystem = defineSystem((world) => {
        const agents = query(world, [
            GoalState,
            EmotionalState,
            ResourceState
        ])

        for (const eid of agents) {
            // Get current context
            const context = getAgentContext(world, eid)

            // Evaluate goal importance
            const goalImportance = evaluateGoalImportance(world, eid)

            // Consider urgency
            const urgencyFactors = assessUrgency(world, eid)

            // Calculate opportunity costs
            const opportunityCosts = calculateOpportunityCosts(world, eid)

            // Update priorities
            updateGoalPriorities(world, eid, {
                importance: goalImportance,
                urgency: urgencyFactors,
                costs: opportunityCosts,
                context
            })

            // Allocate resources
            allocateResources(world, eid)
        }

        return world
    })

[Continue with more systems and integration details...]

Commit message:

Switch tiny world to argOS

designDocsBackup/agents/goal-system.md, after:

# Goal System in ArgOS

The Goal System represents how agents form, prioritize, and pursue objectives. Unlike simple task systems where agents work through predefined lists, ArgOS's goal system creates dynamic, emergent behavior through a sophisticated interplay of desires, opportunities, and constraints.

## Understanding Goals in ArgOS

In real life, goals aren't just items on a to-do list. They're complex, interconnected desires that compete for attention and resources. A person might simultaneously want to advance their career, maintain relationships, learn new skills, and take care of their health. These goals interact, sometimes supporting each other and sometimes conflicting.

ArgOS models this complexity by treating goals as dynamic, evolving structures that exist within a rich context of other goals, emotional states, and environmental conditions. When an agent considers what to do next, they don't just pick the "top" goal - they weigh multiple factors including:

- The relative importance of different goals
- Current opportunities and constraints
- Emotional state and energy levels
- Past experiences and learned patterns
- Social context and relationships
- Available tools and resources
- Time constraints and urgency

## Core Goal Components

The goal system is built on several sophisticated components:

### GoalState Component

This component manages an agent's current goals and their states:

    export const GoalState = defineComponent({
        // Active goals
        activeGoals: [] as number[],      // Currently pursued goals
        goalPriorities: [] as number[],   // Relative importance of goals
        goalProgress: [] as number[],     // Progress toward each goal

        // Goal relationships
        dependencies: [] as number[],      // Goals that must be completed first
        conflicts: [] as number[],         // Goals that interfere with each other
        synergies: [] as number[],         // Goals that help each other

        // Goal context
        resources: [] as number[],         // Resources allocated to goals
        deadlines: [] as number[],         // Time constraints for goals
        flexibility: [] as number[]        // How adaptable each goal is
    })

### GoalCapability Component

This defines an agent's ability to manage and pursue goals:

    export const GoalCapability = defineComponent({
        // Goal management abilities
        planningDepth: [] as number[],     // How far ahead agent can plan
        multitasking: [] as number[],      // Ability to pursue multiple goals
        persistence: [] as number[],       // Ability to maintain long-term goals

        // Goal adaptation
        flexibility: [] as number[],       // Ability to adjust goals
        creativity: [] as number[],        // Ability to find new approaches
        resilience: [] as number[]         // Recovery from setbacks
    })

## Goal Processing Systems

The goal system operates through several interconnected systems:

### GoalGenerationSystem

This system handles the creation and updating of goals:

    export const GoalGenerationSystem = defineSystem((world) => {
        const agents = query(world, [
            GoalState,
            GoalCapability,
            NeedState
        ])

        for (const eid of agents) {
            // Assess current needs
            const needs = assessNeeds(world, eid)

            // Generate goals from needs
            const newGoals = generateGoalsFromNeeds(world, eid, needs)

            // Consider opportunities
            const opportunities = identifyOpportunities(world, eid)
            const opportunisticGoals = generateOpportunisticGoals(
                world,
                eid,
                opportunities
            )

            // Integrate new goals
            integrateNewGoals(world, eid, [...newGoals, ...opportunisticGoals])

            // Update goal relationships
            updateGoalRelationships(world, eid)
        }

        return world
    })

### GoalPrioritizationSystem

This sophisticated system manages how goals compete for attention and resources:

    export const GoalPrioritizationSystem = defineSystem((world) => {
        const agents = query(world, [
            GoalState,
            EmotionalState,
            ResourceState
        ])

        for (const eid of agents) {
            // Get current context
            const context = getAgentContext(world, eid)

            // Evaluate goal importance
            const goalImportance = evaluateGoalImportance(world, eid)

            // Consider urgency
            const urgencyFactors = assessUrgency(world, eid)

            // Calculate opportunity costs
            const opportunityCosts = calculateOpportunityCosts(world, eid)

            // Update priorities
            updateGoalPriorities(world, eid, {
                importance: goalImportance,
                urgency: urgencyFactors,
                costs: opportunityCosts,
                context
            })

            // Allocate resources
            allocateResources(world, eid)
        }

        return world
    })

[Continue with more systems and integration details...]
